NT is a 15 year old girl who was just diagnosed with asthma.  She was been having a 6 month history of periodic episodes of wheezing, dyspnea, and chest pressure about 3 times a week which last about 20 minutes and so far have resolved spontaneously. She thinks that her symptoms have been brought on by exercise and exposure to a friend’s new cat. She is asymptomatic today. She was referred to your medication management clinic to be started on drug and non-drug therapy and monitored until her next appointment with her physician in six months.
PMH:  Allergic rhinitis, currently mild, intermittent
Vaccines up to date 
O:  BP 106/68     P 78     RR 18, unlabored, afebrile
Ht: 5’2”  Wgt:  110#
Spirometry this morning:  
FEV1 82% predicted, FEV1/FVC 85% predicted 
FEV1 94% predicted, FEV1/FVC 90% predicted 20 min. post albuterol 2 puffs (MDI/spacer)
Positive skin test reactions to cat and weed mix
Problem Definition
What data presented in the case define the presence of asthma in this patient?
Characteristic sx of acute bronchospasm and objective improvement of FEV with beta agonist define asthma! Can give methacholine to induce bronchospasm if there is an exaggerated response than they have asthma. 
Would the pos skin test be an objective determiner? No, it would show that you are having an IgE response and can help you avoid what is prompting asthma.
Sx characteristic of asthma that resolve themselves
Definition; acute bronchospasm
Objectively defines asthma:the FEV increases after taking beta agonist
Rapid-onset and short periods of dyspnea
FEV1 improves with bronchodialator
Brought on by exercise and allergin
Problem Assessment
Assess the patient’s asthma using current clinical practice guidelines (NIH EPR-3):
Etiology Genetics? IgE reaction. Genetics and allergies are the etiology 
inflammation, bronchoconstriction (obstruction), hyper-responsiveness these are more pathophysiology. 
Severity: mild persistent. Look at chart, if anything falls into a higher severity class go with that.
Why Now? Allergins and exercise. 

In her opinion; use MDI with spacer for start because that’s what you use with albuterol
Therapeutic Objectives
What are the therapeutic objectives for the patient’s asthma at this time?
Reduce impairment and risk. IS NOT CORRECT. MUST BE MEASURABLE, REALISTIC AND ACHIEVABLE
Prevent chronic and troublesome sx
Improve FEV1 
Maintain normal activity levels (wouldn’t put that in the case if there wasn’t a complaint)
Reduce risk; exacerbation
Prevent progressive loss of lung function (by treating aggressively with corticosteroid) ** 
Decrease number of episodes
Decrease response to triggers
Shorter lasting episodes
Maintain normal activities.

Indices of Effect
What data will you monitor to determine if you have met your stated therapeutic objectives?
Subjective:
Cough, triggers, dyspnea, and effectiveness of medication, tolerate activities 
Objective:
Respiratory exam, heart rate (due to hypoxia, not discriminating) , PFT’s, Chest X ray, FEV1, number of exacerbations (# hospital visits), if HTN is a toxicity of a drug you moniter BP, examine lips and fingers for cyanosis, pulse oximetry for HR and O2 saturation.
 BE ABLE TO CALC PEAK FLOW RATE BASED ON AGE HIEGHT AND GENDER.
All of these are not applicable for these patients. If someone is not having sx it doesn’t make sense to put a pulse ox on them. 
List of Therapeutic Agents
List the available therapeutic agents (drug and non-drug) that will allow you to meet your therapeutic objectives for this patient as you assessed it.
Avoid triggers
Anti-inflammatory agents: inhaled corticosteroids (beclomethasone, budesonide, ciclesdonide, flunisolide)
Or SABA prn
wouldn’t need oral corticosteroids, anti IgE and antihistamines also wouldn’t help asthma
Low dose ICS is the best treatment for her but another option could be…
Anti-leukotriene (LTRA). Not first line!
Patient Related Variables
List the patient-related variables you need to determine before you can select a therapeutic regimen for the patient’s asthma.
If they can use an inhaler properly, adherence
With systemic cort; will have fluid retention→ HF
Hypokalemia if you already have it need to worry about the drugs
Methyxanthines have age related clearane, ishemic (also beta agonists would cause problems with this)
If they have phenolketonuria whatch for **** KNOW THAT STUFF IN DRUGS WILL BE AN ISSUE LOOK UP WHAT SPECIFICALLY***


Agent Related Variables
List the agent-related variables for the agents you are considering for treatment of the patient’s asthma.
Efficacy- ICS will always be first line 
Quick relief SABA like atropine
Safety; low dose
Method of illumination; ex if there is hepatic disease or phenoketonuria
SE; to monitor for therapy
DI; some leukotrienes have a lot of ADR. 
Cost
Convenience;  MDI albuterol with spacer vs dry powder inhaler.  
Low-dose ICS;
 due to its beneficial effects on remodeling, disease progression and modification when compared to other agents. 
Single daily dose or every other day (2x daily dose)= convenient 
Gargle/rinse/expectorate compliance
At lower doses SE minimal


